docs/03-client-tools.md, before:

# Client Tools

We need to install all the relevant binaries to your jumpbox (you _could_ install all this locally, but it's just as easy to download them to an ephemeral remote workstation, and saves the need to clean up later).

## Setting up the jumpbox server

First, we need to get the ID of the playground that has the jumpbox.

```sh
JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID=$(labctl playground list -o json | jq -r '.[] | select(.machines | length == 1 and .[0].name == "jumpbox") | .id')
```

and then we need to copy over the file with the installation URLs.

```sh
labctl cp ./downloads.txt $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/downloads.txt
```

and now we're ready to jump on there and install some tools.

```sh
labctl ssh $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID
```

your terminal should know look like this:

```sh
laborant@jumpbox:~$
```

Let's download all the tools first

```sh
wget -q --show-progress \
  --https-only \
  --timestamping \
  -P downloads \
  -i downloads.txt
```

and now we can expand the tar files and move the binaries

```sh
ARCH=$(dpkg --print-architecture)
mkdir -p downloads/{client,cni-plugins,controller,worker}
tar -xvf downloads/crictl-v1.32.0-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  -C downloads/worker/
tar -xvf downloads/containerd-2.1.0-beta.0-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  --strip-components 1 \
  -C downloads/worker/
tar -xvf downloads/cni-plugins-linux-${ARCH}-v1.6.2.tgz \
  -C downloads/cni-plugins/
tar -xvf downloads/etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  -C downloads/ \
  --strip-components 1 \
  etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}/etcdctl \
  etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}/etcd
mv downloads/{etcdctl,kubectl} downloads/client/
mv downloads/{etcd,kube-apiserver,kube-controller-manager,kube-scheduler} \
  downloads/controller/
mv downloads/{kubelet,kube-proxy} downloads/worker/
mv downloads/runc.${ARCH} downloads/worker/runc
```

and remove the archives

```sh
rm -rf downloads/*gz
```

and then we need to make the binaries executable

```sh
chmod +x downloads/{client,cni-plugins,controller,worker}/*
```

## Install Kubectl

We need the `kubectl` binary to be available to run on the jumpbox, so let's move it into the `$PATH`.

```sh
sudo cp downloads/client/kubectl /usr/local/bin/
```

You'll now be able to run the `kubectl` command and see the version info:

```sh
kubectl version --client
```
```sh
Client Version: v1.32.3
Kustomize Version: v5.5.0
```

## Making sure we can access the other machines from the jumpbox

Let's generate an ssh key locally and then distribute it across all the VMs. Unfortunately, because we can currently only access every machine using labctl, we'll use that to get all the ssh keys to the nodes. After that, we can access all the VMs by hostname (because of tailscale magic) using ssh.

```sh
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "root@jumpbox" -o -a 100 -f kubernetes.ed25519 -N ""
```

We put the private key we just created onto the jumpbox

```sh
labctl cp ./kubernetes.ed25519 $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/.ssh/
```

And the last step is to get the public key onto the jumpbox and also add it to the `authorized_keys` file on all the other machines.

```sh
for playground_id in $(labctl playground list -q); do
  for machine_name in $(labctl playground machines $playground_id | sed '1d'); do
    if [[ $playground_id == $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID ]]; then
      echo "adding ssh key to the jumpbox"
      labctl cp ./kubernetes.ed25519.pub $playground_id --machine $machine_name:~/.ssh/
    else
      echo "adding the jumpbox ssh key to the authorized_keys for $machine_name"
      labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "chmod 600 ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
      cat ./kubernetes.ed25519.pub | labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "cat >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
      labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "chmod 400 ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
    fi
  done
done
```

Your jumpbox is now set up and ready to run the rest of the commands.

Commit message:

also copy over service unit configs

docs/03-client-tools.md, after:

# Client Tools

We need to install all the relevant binaries to your jumpbox (you _could_ install all this locally, but it's just as easy to download them to an ephemeral remote workstation, and saves the need to clean up later).

## Setting up the jumpbox server

First, we need to get the ID of the playground that has the jumpbox.

```sh
JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID=$(labctl playground list -o json | jq -r '.[] | select(.machines | length == 1 and .[0].name == "jumpbox") | .id')
```

and then we need to copy over the file with the installation URLs.

```sh
labctl cp ./downloads.txt $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/downloads.txt
```

We also want to copy over some of the configuration file directories to the jumpbox

```sh
labclt cp -r ./configs $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/configs
labctl cp -r ./units $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/units
```

and now we're ready to jump on there and install some tools.

```sh
labctl ssh $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID
```

your terminal should know look like this:

```sh
laborant@jumpbox:~$
```

Let's download all the tools first

```sh
wget -q --show-progress \
  --https-only \
  --timestamping \
  -P downloads \
  -i downloads.txt
```

and now we can expand the tar files and move the binaries

```sh
ARCH=$(dpkg --print-architecture)
mkdir -p downloads/{client,cni-plugins,controller,worker}
tar -xvf downloads/crictl-v1.32.0-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  -C downloads/worker/
tar -xvf downloads/containerd-2.1.0-beta.0-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  --strip-components 1 \
  -C downloads/worker/
tar -xvf downloads/cni-plugins-linux-${ARCH}-v1.6.2.tgz \
  -C downloads/cni-plugins/
tar -xvf downloads/etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz \
  -C downloads/ \
  --strip-components 1 \
  etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}/etcdctl \
  etcd-v3.6.0-rc.3-linux-${ARCH}/etcd
mv downloads/{etcdctl,kubectl} downloads/client/
mv downloads/{etcd,kube-apiserver,kube-controller-manager,kube-scheduler} \
  downloads/controller/
mv downloads/{kubelet,kube-proxy} downloads/worker/
mv downloads/runc.${ARCH} downloads/worker/runc
```

and remove the archives

```sh
rm -rf downloads/*gz
```

and then we need to make the binaries executable

```sh
chmod +x downloads/{client,cni-plugins,controller,worker}/*
```

## Install Kubectl

We need the `kubectl` binary to be available to run on the jumpbox, so let's move it into the `$PATH`.

```sh
sudo cp downloads/client/kubectl /usr/local/bin/
```

You'll now be able to run the `kubectl` command and see the version info:

```sh
kubectl version --client
```
```sh
Client Version: v1.32.3
Kustomize Version: v5.5.0
```

## Making sure we can access the other machines from the jumpbox

Let's generate an ssh key locally and then distribute it across all the VMs. Unfortunately, because we can currently only access every machine using labctl, we'll use that to get all the ssh keys to the nodes. After that, we can access all the VMs by hostname (because of tailscale magic) using ssh.

```sh
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "root@jumpbox" -o -a 100 -f kubernetes.ed25519 -N ""
```

We put the private key we just created onto the jumpbox

```sh
labctl cp ./kubernetes.ed25519 $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID:~/.ssh/
```

And the last step is to get the public key onto the jumpbox and also add it to the `authorized_keys` file on all the other machines.

```sh
for playground_id in $(labctl playground list -q); do
  for machine_name in $(labctl playground machines $playground_id | sed '1d'); do
    if [[ $playground_id == $JUMPBOX_PLAYGROUND_ID ]]; then
      echo "adding ssh key to the jumpbox"
      labctl cp ./kubernetes.ed25519.pub $playground_id --machine $machine_name:~/.ssh/
    else
      echo "adding the jumpbox ssh key to the authorized_keys for $machine_name"
      labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "chmod 600 ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
      cat ./kubernetes.ed25519.pub | labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "cat >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
      labctl ssh $playground_id --machine $machine_name -- "chmod 400 ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
    fi
  done
done
```

Your jumpbox is now set up and ready to run the rest of the commands.
